---
layout: post
title: Copy-Paste driven development
---

Recently I had a talk at [XConf EU], a technology
conference sponsored by ThoughtWorks. I want to present
my journey with Swift - Apples new development language.
We already knew before the talks that most of the audience
wouldn't have deep background experience in iOS or OS X development.
Swift has a lot of language functionalities that we was willing to provide,
but by presenting static code on slides we wont be able to
present the look and feel that Swift development brings with it
Every well presented slide showing the different languages patterns
will increase the informal value of the presentation,
but it be will a hard challenge to keep the entertaining value on the same level.

Having the presentation idea in our mind, we decided to do a 20 minutes live coding session.
During the dry runs our talks we got different feedback. Most of our colleguages
suggested to avoid this pattern - "it will be hard to keep the informal value high",
"nobody wants to see you typing", "I often saw unexpected events that crashed the sessions".
Of course they all was right, that was also my personal experience of live coding during
conference talks. Neverless we want to present the look and feel - so we decided to use more
safe presentation approach: copy-paste driven development. (cpdd)

When presenting live code during a talk make it very easy to follow you.
Ask the audience which languages the already know - come up with similarities to those
languages during your explanation. Use a problem that audience already knows, typically from
their day-to-day work or spare time. Wrap the the features you want to present in a journey.
In our talk we used the board game snakes and ladders, which we were able to explain in 30
seconds without loosing the audience. In addition to this, we prepared a basic and very
encapsulated setup on which we could start with.


{% highlight js %}
import Foundation
import XCTest

class BoardTest: XCTestCase {

    class Board {
        let size = 25
        var position : Int = 0

        func move(numberOfFields: Int) {
          if (newPosition > size) {
            position = size
          } else {
            position = newPosition!
          }
        }
    }

    var board: Board!

    override func setUp() {
        board = Board()
    }

    func testHasRightSize() {
        XCTAssertEqual(board.size, 25)
    }

    func testBoardMove() {
        XCTAssertEqual(board.position, 0)
        board.move(2)
        XCTAssertEqual(board.position, 2)
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

We want to do TDD, so we prepared a typically test scenario with a nested class
that we want to implement during the talk. In addition to this we added snippets
to copy, following a red line. Find a very simple to way to copy these code snippets in your
implementation. Nothing destroys the attention of the audience more than
a speaker who just carries on his own.

{% highlight js %}
///INTRODUCE Snakes
let snakes: [(Int,Int)] = [(24, 1)]

//TEST with snakes
func testAllSnakesHaveProperHeadAndTailEnd() {
    for snake in board.snakes {
        let (head, tailEnd) = snake
        XCTAssertNotEqual(head, tailEnd)
        XCTAssertLessThan(tailEnd, head)
        XCTAssertLessThan(head, 25)
        XCTAssertGreaterThan(tailEnd, 0)
    }
}

//MOVE TEST WITH SNAKES
func testBoardMoveToSnakesHead() {
    board.move(24)
    XCTAssertEqual(board.position, 1)
}

//MOVE WITH SNAKES
func move(numberOfFields: Int) {

    var newPosition: Int = position + numberOfFields

    let maybeResetePosition = snakes.filter { (head, tail) -> Bool in
        return head == newPosition
        }.first?.1

    if let resetedPosition = maybeResetePosition {
        newPosition = resetedPosition
    }

    if (newPosition > size) {
        position = size
    } else {
        position = newPosition
    }
}

///INTRODUCE LADDERS
let ladders: [(Int,Int)] = [(3, 16)]

// TEST LADDERS
func testAllLaddersHaveProperStartAndEnd() {
    for ladder in board.ladders {
        let (start, end) = ladder
        XCTAssertNotEqual(start, end)
        XCTAssertLessThan(start, end)
        XCTAssertLessThan(end, 25)
        XCTAssertGreaterThan(start, 0)
    }
}

// MOVE TEST LADDERS
func testBoardMoveToLadderStart() {
    board.move(3)
    XCTAssertEqual(board.position, 16)
}
{% endhighlight %}

The figure above shows our journey - introducing snakes, reimplement the movement
function and finally adding ladders to the board. We tried to keep the context
switches, which automatically comes with the copy-paste interaction, as less as possible.
Find a simple way to copy the code snippets - we used 2 windows - one for the implementation itself,
the other one prepared with our code snippets. There are better ways,
software tools like [TODO] can support you.

 - explanation
  - how does the snippets look like?
  - refactor the code
  - interaction during presentation


The presentation pattern "copy-paste driven development" can be used to show within an interactive presentation
 the look and feel of language or framework in its typically environment. The pattern allows the usage of different
implementation techniques, such as TDD and BDD. Used during a journey within a well know problem it makes it easy for
the audience to follow your thoughts and offers a high entertaining value at the same time.
